---
layout: post
title: "Computing the Parity of a Word (Part 2)"
date: 2019-12-02
categories: EPI
---
This is my study note of the book "_Elements of Programming Interviews in Python_" and Part 2 of the series.

## Solution 3: Lookup Table
Now, let's consider a qualitatively different approach. The problem states that we wish to calculate parity up to 64 bit integer, which equals to 2<sup>64</sup> = very very large number!! One approach to calculate parity for a big binary word is to use an array-based lookup table. (This is a common performance improving technique in bit fiddling compuations.) Let's start with defining what lookup table is.

### Lookup Table
We can think of lookup table as something like a dictionary. So when we have a unique key (= word), we can easily look for its corresponding value (= definition). Let's focus on array-based lookup table here. An array is a list of values with numeric index typically starting with 0.
```
Value: |"a"|"party"|"cup"|"pencil"|"plane"|
Index: | 0 |   1   |  2  |   3    |   4   | 
```
So using the example above, let's say that our array is called `Array`, then `Array[0]` returns `"a"`, `Array[2]` returns "cup", and similarly, `Array[4]` returns "plane". (Note: that you cannot go beyond the index range that is not defined. ie. `Array[5]` is not accepted and it will return an error). The typical lookup operation's runtime is `O(1)`.

---
So can we create 2<sup>64</sup> lookup table entry and make our algorithm `O(1)`? Yes, but... this would require us a storage space of around two exabytes (or 20 million terabytes). Let's go back to calculating parity for very small number.

The 1-bit case is the simplest form, where parity equals to the bit number itself. 
```
parity(0) -> 0
parity(1) -> 1
```
Now, let us consider the 2-bit case. 
```
parity(00) -> 0
parity(01) -> 1
parity(10) -> 1
parity(11) -> 0
```
Doesn't this look like `XOR` truth table? We can also say that the parity of the 2-bit case equals to XOR operation between the first bit and the second bit. (`parity == b0 ^ b1`)

Can we extend this to the 3-bit case? Yes! The parity is equivalent to `b0 ^ b1 ^ b2 == b0 ^ parity(b1b2)`.
```
parity(000) -> 0
parity(001) -> 1
parity(010) -> 1
parity(011) -> 0
parity(100) -> 1
parity(101) -> 0
parity(110) -> 0
parity(111) -> 1
```

Knowing this, we can state the following:
> - The parity of the single bit is itself (Base case)
> - The parity of the concatenation of bitstrings `x` and `y` is the `XOR` of the parity of `x` and the parity of `y`

Let's verify this with computing parity of `11001010`. Let's assume we have a parity lookup table for 2-bit cases. Then, we can breakdown the binary word into pairs of two bits: 
```
(11) (00) (10) (10)
```
Let's lookup these bits against the lookup table:
```
(0) (0) (1) (1)
```
`XOR`ing these numbers gives `0^0^1^1 == 0`, which equals to the parity of `11001010`!

How can we extract these bits (or divide it into chunks)? (11) can be extracted by right shifting the number by 6 bits (ie. `11001010 >> 6 == 00000011`). But, we cannot fetch the next two bits with simple shifting as before. Shifting to right by 4 bits returns `00001100`, where it has unwanted `(11)`. Here we can perform `masking technique` on lower two bits to extract these. (ie. we can perform `&` with `00000011` to extract `(00)`). Then similar approach can be performed to get other pairs. (right shifting by 4 and masking extracts `(01)` and masking original word returns `(01)`).

---

Let's combine these ideas to calculate the parity of 64-bit words. We will use size `16`-bit lookup table to calculate 64-bit words. `16` results 2<sup>16</sup> = 65536 entries and 16 evenly divides 64 into 4 chunks. The algorithm looks like the following.

```python
def parity(x):
    MASK_SIZE = 16
    BIT_MASK = 0xFFFF (== 1111111111111111)
    return (PRECOMPUTED_PARITY[x >> (3 * MASK_SIZE)] ^
            PRECOMPUTED_PARITY[(x >> (2 * MASK_SIZE)) & BIT_MASK] ^
            PRECOMPUTED_PARITY[(x >> (MASK_SIZE)) & BIT_MASK] ^
            PRECOMPUTED_PARITY[x & BIT_MASK])
```

The time complexity is a function fo the size of the keys used to index the lookup table. Let `L` be the width of the words for which we used for creating lookup table values (ie. `16` for above), and `n` the word size. Since there are `n/L` terms, the time complexity is `O(n/L)`.

# Solution 4: XOR property of parity
As we mentioned previously, the parity of the word is equal to the XOR of parity of the sub-words. Thus, we can comeup with the following algorithm.

```python
def parity(x):
    x ^= x >> 32
    x ^= x >> 16
    x ^= x >> 8
    x ^= x >> 4
    x ^= x >> 2
    x ^= x >> 1
    return x & 0x1 
```

This algorithm has time complexity of `O(log(n))`, where `n` is the word size.


# Conclusion
We have successfully came up with the algorithm to solve the parity problem. We started with the simplest approach of brute-force algorithm. Then we utilized some characteristics of bit characteristics and manipulation techniques to improve the algorithm. 

# Resources
- Adnan Aziz, Tsung-Hsien Lee, and Amit Prakash. <cite>Elements of Programming Interviews in Python: The Insider's Guide.</cite>, USA, 2016.
