---
layout: post
title: "Computing the Parity of a Word"
date: 2019-11-30
categories: EPI
---
This is my study note of the book "_Elements of Programming Interviews in Python_". 

# What is a Parity?
Parity is a check that we use in communications systems. Unlike humans, computers won't know if the data sent/received is valid or not. Parity (or parity bit check) is a simple method to quickly identify if the data received is valid from the source. 

The `par` in parity means equality (or equivalence). As the naming suggests, we would like to check if the number of 1's and 0's are both `ODD` or `EVEN`. In this post, we will only consider `ODD` parity. 

Let's consider that packets (data) are sent in chunks of 1 bytes (= 8 bits). Among these 8 bits, we use 7 bits to contain the message and 1 bit to pass parity bit. 

Here is the example of the data that we wish to send
```
|1|0|0|0|1|0|0| |
```

Since there are even number of 1's in the message, we in order to validate against odd parity check, our parity bit needs to be `1`.
```
|1|0|0|0|1|0|0|1|
```

If received data is altered as following, the reciever can tell that the data is invalid and ask to re-send the same data over. (Now, the number of 1's are `EVEN`)
```
Sent:       |1|0|0|0|1|0|0|1|
Received:   |1|0|1|0|1|0|0|1|
```

However, this error detection won't work all the time. Notice the case when two bits are altered:
```
Sent:       |1|0|0|0|1|0|0|1|
Received:   |1|0|1|0|0|0|0|1|
```
In here, received data is altered yet we still see odd number of 1's -> Parity check says the data received is valid. Therefore, __parity bit can fail to identify error__.

# Problem
So the problem we wish to solve is how to compute the parity of the received data?
and how would you compute the parity of a very large number of 64-bit words?

In simpler question, we wish to come up with a solution that returns `1` if number of 1's in the word is odd; otherwise, returns `0`.

For example:
- `parity(1011)` -> 1
- `parity(10001000)` -> 0

# Solution
## Background
Before going into solutions, here we outline some background information that is required to answer the problem.
### Bitwise Operations
1. `AND`
    - A __bitwise AND__ opeartion performs the __logical AND__ opertation where it results a value of `true` if and only if both of its operands are `true`. In binary, the following truth table holds for `0` and `1`. In python, we denote `AND` with `&`.
        ```python
        0 & 0 == 0
        0 & 1 == 0
        1 & 0 == 0
        1 & 1 == 1
        ```
2. `XOR`
    - A __bitwise XOR__ operation performs the __logical exclusive OR__ operation where is results a value of `true` when inputs differ. (One is `true` and other is `false`). In python, we denote `XOR` with `^`.
        ```python
        0 ^ 0 = 1
        0 ^ 1 = 0
        1 ^ 0 = 0
        1 ^ 1 = 1
        ```
3. `Logical Shift`
    - A  __logical shift__ is a bitwise operation that shifts all the bits of its operand and zeros are filled on discarded bits. There are two shifts: left shift and right shift.
    - Left shift (`<<` in python)
        ```python
        23 << 1 == 46  # 00010111 << 1 == 00101110
        ```
    - Right shift (`>>` in python)
        ```python
        23 >> 1 == 11  # 00010111 >> 1 == 00001011
        ```


## Solution 1: Brute-Force Algorithm
Let's start with the simplest algorithm. Starting from Least Significant Bit (LSB), let's check how many 1's are there. We can keep track of a counter variable and increment it whenever we see a `1` and perform `mod 2` after the scanning to return the answer. For example, given `1011` we have `3` 1's. Therefore our answer is `1 (== 3 % 2)`.

Now the question is: How can we take LSB from the word? To answer this, we will use a technique called __bit masking__.

---

### Bit Masking
Using a bit mask, we can turn on/off desired bits in a word. There are two methods of bit masking: 1) Masking bits to `1` and 2) Masking bits to `0`. We will consider the second case here. Masking bits to `0` utilizes characteristic of `AND` operation. Simply, we perform operation against same length word with 1's in the positions where we want to turn on the bit and 0's in the positions where we want to ignore it. Let's look at the followig example.

From a given string 10010101, we wish to mask the upper four bits (ie. 1001). So let's take `AND` operation against `00001111`.
```
    10010101
AND 00001111
  = 00000101
```
After the `AND` operation, we got our desired masked value: `00000101`.

---

Let's come back to our algorithm. Here, we are only interested with the `LSB` of the word. Hence we can perform `AND` operation with `00000001` or simply `1`. Since we have all the building blocks, let's start implementing the algorithm.

```python
def parity(x):
    counter = 0
    while x > 0:
        lsb = x & 1
        if lsb == 1:
            counter += 1
        
        # we perform right shift here to read in next bit data
        x = x >> 1
    result = counter % 2
    return result
```

Let's improve our solution here. Take a look at the following table:
<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th>Counter</th> <th>mod 2</th> <th>result</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td>0</td> <td>0</td> <td>0</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>1</td> <td>1</td> <td>1</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>2</td> <td>0</td> <td>0</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>3</td> <td>1</td> <td>1</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>4</td> <td>0</td> <td>0</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>


Since we are only interesed with returning boolean output (`0` or `1`), we can actually replace `counter % 2` with `XOR` operation.
```python
def parity(x):
    result = 0
    while x > 0:
        lsb = x & 1
        result = result ^ lsb
        x = x >> 1
    return result
```

Or in more compact version, the solution looks like this:
   
```python
def parity(x):
    result = 0
    while x:
        result ^= x & 1
        x >>= 1
    return result
```

This algorithm has time complexity of `O(n)`, where `n` is the length of the word. This algorithm would work for small words, but it will get slower as the word size increases. Let's take a look how we can improve it from here.

## Solution 2: O(k) Solution (k is number of 1's in the word)
Let's go back to the definition of the parity, and see that we are only interested with _the number of `1`s_.
> The parity of a binary word is 1 is the number of 1s in the word is odd; otherwise it is 0.

Here we will utilize the following __trick__ and idea of looking at only the active bits (ie. `1`) to improve the performance of the algorithm.

### Bit-fiddling Trick
**Erasing the lowest set bit**

`x & (x-1)` equals `x` with lowest set bit erased. 

For example,
```
    x       00101100
    x-1     00101011
& --------------------
            00101000
```

---
Using this trick, we can reduce the time complexity of the algorithm to `O(k)` where `k` is the number of `1`'s in a particular word.

```python
def parity(x):
    result = 0
    while x:
        result ^= 1
        x &= (x-1)
    return result
```

This would have a same time complexity as Solution 1 for the worst case, but for average and best cases, this would perform much faster.

### (Bonus) Other Bit-fiddling Trick
**Isolating the lowest bit that is 1 in x**
`x & ~(x-1)` equals isolating the lowest bit that is 1 in x.

For example,
```
    x       00101100
  ~(x-1)    11010100
& --------------------
            00000100
```


## Solution 3: Lookup Table
Now, let's consider a qualitatively different approach. The problem states that we wish to calculate parity up to 64 bit integer, which equals to 2<sup>64</sup> = very very large number!! One approach to calculate parity for a big binary word is to use an array-based lookup table. (This is a common performance improving technique in bit fiddling compuations.) Let's start with defining what lookup table is.

### Lookup Table
We can think of lookup table as something like a dictionary. So when we have a unique key (= word), we can easily look for its corresponding value (= definition). Let's focus on array-based lookup table here. An array is a list of values with numeric index typically starting with 0.
```
Value: |"a"|"party"|"cup"|"pencil"|"plane"|
Index: | 0 |   1   |  2  |   3    |   4   | 
```
So using the example above, let's say that our array is called `Array`, then `Array[0]` returns `"a"`, `Array[2]` returns "cup", and similarly, `Array[4]` returns "plane". (Note: that you cannot go beyond the index range that is not defined. ie. `Array[5]` is not accepted and it will return an error). The typical lookup operation's runtime is `O(1)`.

---
So can we create 2<sup>64</sup> lookup table entry and make our algorithm `O(1)`? Yes, but... this would require us a storage space of around two exabytes (or 20 million terabytes). Let's go back to calculating parity for very small number.

The 1-bit case is the simplest form, where parity equals to the bit number itself. 
```
parity(0) -> 0
parity(1) -> 1
```
Now, let us consider the 2-bit case. 
```
parity(00) -> 0
parity(01) -> 1
parity(10) -> 1
parity(11) -> 0
```
Doesn't this look like `XOR` truth table? We can also say that the parity of the 2-bit case equals to XOR operation between the first bit and the second bit. (`parity == b0 ^ b1`)

Can we extend this to the 3-bit case? Yes! The parity is equivalent to `b0 ^ b1 ^ b2 == b0 ^ parity(b1b2)`.
```
parity(000) -> 0
parity(001) -> 1
parity(010) -> 1
parity(011) -> 0
parity(100) -> 1
parity(101) -> 0
parity(110) -> 0
parity(111) -> 1
```

Knowing this, we can state the following:
> - The parity of the single bit is itself (Base case)
> - The parity of the concatenation of bitstrings `x` and `y` is the `XOR` of the parity of `x` and the parity of `y`

Let's verify this with computing parity of `11001010`. Let's assume we have a parity lookup table for 2-bit cases. Then, we can breakdown the binary word into pairs of two bits: 
```
(11) (00) (10) (10)
```
Let's lookup these bits against the lookup table:
```
(0) (0) (1) (1)
```
`XOR`ing these numbers gives `0^0^1^1 == 0`, which equals to the parity of `11001010`!

How can we extract these bits (or divide it into chunks)? (11) can be extracted by right shifting the number by 6 bits (ie. `11001010 >> 6 == 00000011`). But, we cannot fetch the next two bits with simple shifting as before. Shifting to right by 4 bits returns `00001100`, where it has unwanted `(11)`. Here we can perform `masking technique` on lower two bits to extract these. (ie. we can perform `&` with `00000011` to extract `(00)`). Then similar approach can be performed to get other pairs. (right shifting by 4 and masking extracts `(01)` and masking original word returns `(01)`).

---

Let's combine these ideas to calculate the parity of 64-bit words. We will use size `16`-bit lookup table to calculate 64-bit words. `16` results 2<sup>16</sup> = 65536 entries and 16 evenly divides 64 into 4 chunks. The algorithm looks like the following.

```python
def parity(x):
    MASK_SIZE = 16
    BIT_MASK = 0xFFFF (== 1111111111111111)
    return (PRECOMPUTED_PARITY[x >> (3 * MASK_SIZE)] ^
            PRECOMPUTED_PARITY[(x >> (2 * MASK_SIZE)) & BIT_MASK] ^
            PRECOMPUTED_PARITY[(x >> (MASK_SIZE)) & BIT_MASK] ^
            PRECOMPUTED_PARITY[x & BIT_MASK])
```

The time complexity is a function fo the size of the keys used to index the lookup table. Let `L` be the width of the words for which we used for creating lookup table values (ie. `16` for above), and `n` the word size. Since there are `n/L` terms, the time complexity is `O(n/L)`.

# Solution 4: XOR property of parity
As we mentioned previously, the parity of the word is equal to the XOR of parity of the sub-words. Thus, we can comeup with the following algorithm.

```python
def parity(x):
    x ^= x >> 32
    x ^= x >> 16
    x ^= x >> 8
    x ^= x >> 4
    x ^= x >> 2
    x ^= x >> 1
    return x & 0x1 
```

This algorithm has time complexity of `O(log(n))`, where `n` is the word size.


# Conclusion
We have successfully came up with the algorithm to solve the parity problem. We started with the simplest approach of brute-force algorithm. Then we utilized some characteristics of bit characteristics and manipulation techniques to improve the algorithm. 

# Resources
- Adnan Aziz, Tsung-Hsien Lee, and Amit Prakash. <cite>Elements of Programming Interviews in Python: The Insider's Guide.</cite>, USA, 2016.
- Great video introducing what parity bit is: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pUBdJi6eVYA
